Abstract
The links between identification and control are examined. The main trends in this research area are summarized, with particular focus on the design of low complexity controllers from a statistical perspective. It is argued that a guiding principle should be to model as well as possible before any model or controller simplifications are made as this ensures the best statistical accuracy. This does not necessarily mean that a full-order model always is necessary as well designed experiments allow for restricted complexity models to be near-optimal. Experiment design can therefore be seen as the key to successful applications. For this reason, particular attention is given to the interaction between experimental constraints and performance specifications.

Previous article in issueNext article in issue
Keywords
Identification for controlStatistical analysisExperiment designModel validation

Håkan Hjalmarsson was born in 1962. He received the M.S. degree in Electrical Engineering in 1988, and the Licentiate degree and the Ph.D. degree in Automatic Control in 1990 and 1993, respectively, all from Linköping University, Sweden. He has held visiting research positions at California Institute of Technology, Louvain University and the University of Newcastle, Australia. He has served as an Associate Editor for Automatica and been a Guest Editor for European Journal of Control and Control Engineering Practice. He is currently an Associate Editor for IEEE Transactions for Automatic Control and Professor in the Department of Signals, Sensors and Systems at the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden. He is a member of the IFAC Technical Committee on Modeling, Identification and Signal Processing since 1996. In 2001 he received the KTH award for outstanding contribution to undergraduate education. His research interests include system identification, signal processing, control and estimation in communication networks and automated tuning of controllers.

---
Greenhouse gas
ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE
WRITTEN BY: Michael E. Mann
See Article History
Alternative Title: GHG
Greenhouse gas, any gas that has the property of absorbing infrared radiation (net heat energy) emitted from Earth’s surface and reradiating it back to Earth’s surface, thus contributing to the greenhouse effect. Carbon dioxide, methane, and water vapour are the most important greenhouse gases. (To a lesser extent, surface-level ozone, nitrous oxides, and fluorinated gases also trap infrared radiation.) Greenhouse gases have a profound effect on the energy budget of the Earth system despite making up only a fraction of all atmospheric gases. Concentrations of greenhouse gases have varied substantially during Earth’s history, and these variations have driven substantial climate changes at a wide range of timescales. In general, greenhouse gas concentrations have been particularly high during warm periods and low during cold periods.

A series of photographs of the Grinnell Glacier taken from the summit of Mount Gould in Glacier National Park, Montana, in 1938, 1981, 1998, and 2006 (from left to right). In 1938 the Grinnell Glacier filled the entire area at the bottom of the image. By 2006 it had largely disappeared from this view.
READ MORE ON THIS TOPIC
climate change: Greenhouse gases
Greenhouse gases are gas molecules that have the property of absorbing infrared radiation (net heat energy) emitted from…
A number of processes influence greenhouse gas concentrations. Some, such as tectonic activities, operate at timescales of millions of years, whereas others, such as vegetation, soil, wetland, and ocean sources and sinks, operate at timescales of hundreds to thousands of years. Human activities—especially fossil-fuel combustion since the Industrial Revolution—are responsible for steady increases in atmospheric concentrations of various greenhouse gases, especially carbon dioxide, methane, ozone, and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).

earth day logo
BRITANNICA EXPLORES
EARTH'S TO-DO LIST
Human action has triggered a vast cascade of environmental problems that now threaten the continued ability of both natural and human systems to flourish. Solving the critical environmental problems of global warming, water scarcity, pollution, and biodiversity loss are perhaps the greatest challenges of the 21st century. Will we rise to meet them?
The effect of each greenhouse gas on Earth’s climate depends on its chemical nature and its relative concentration in the atmosphere. Some gases have a high capacity for absorbing infrared radiation or occur in significant quantities, whereas others have considerably lower capacities for absorption or occur only in trace amounts. Radiative forcing, as defined by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), is a measure of the influence a given greenhouse gas or other climatic factor (such as solar irradiance or albedo) has on the amount of radiant energy impinging upon Earth’s surface. To understand the relative influence of each greenhouse gas, so-called forcing values (given in watts per square metre) calculated for the time period between 1750 and the present day are given below.

greenhouse gas
greenhouse gas
Learn about the basic physical and chemical characteristics of Earth's various atmospheric gas molecules. Some of those molecules belong to a category of atmospheric gases called greenhouse gases, whose properties help to slow the emission of heat energy, which was absorbed by Earth's surface during the day, back into space at night.
© MinuteEarth (
A Britannica Publishing Partner)
Video Player is loading.

Advertisement
Major Greenhouse Gases
Water vapour
Water vapour is the most potent greenhouse gas in Earth’s atmosphere, but its behaviour is fundamentally different from that of the other greenhouse gases. The primary role of water vapour is not as a direct agent of radiative forcing but rather as a climate feedback—that is, as a response within the climate system that influences the system’s continued activity. This distinction arises because the amount of water vapour in the atmosphere cannot, in general, be directly modified by human behaviour but is instead set by air temperatures. The warmer the surface, the greater the evaporation rate of water from the surface. As a result, increased evaporation leads to a greater concentration of water vapour in the lower atmosphere capable of absorbing infrared radiation and emitting it back to the surface.

In the hydrologic cycle, water is transferred between the land surface, the ocean, and the atmosphere.
In the hydrologic cycle, water is transferred between the land surface, the ocean, and the atmosphere.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Get unlimited access to all of Britannica’s trusted content.
Start Your Free Trial Today
Carbon dioxide
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is the most significant greenhouse gas. Natural sources of atmospheric CO2 include outgassing from volcanoes, the combustion and natural decay of organic matter, and respiration by aerobic (oxygen-using) organisms. These sources are balanced, on average, by a set of physical, chemical, or biological processes, called “sinks,” that tend to remove CO2 from the atmosphere. Significant natural sinks include terrestrial vegetation, which takes up CO2 during photosynthesis.


A number of oceanic processes also act as carbon sinks. One such process, the “solubility pump,” involves the descent of surface seawater containing dissolved CO2. Another process, the “biological pump,” involves the uptake of dissolved CO2 by marine vegetation and phytoplankton (small, free-floating, photosynthetic organisms) living in the upper ocean or by other marine organisms that use CO2 to build skeletons and other structures made of calcium carbonate (CaCO3). As these organisms expire and fall to the ocean floor, their carbon is transported downward and eventually buried at depth. A long-term balance between these natural sources and sinks leads to the background, or natural, level of CO2 in the atmosphere.

In contrast, human activities increase atmospheric CO2 levels primarily through the burning of fossil fuels (principally oil and coal, and secondarily natural gas, for use in transportation, heating, and electricity production) and through the production of cement. Other anthropogenic sources include the burning of forests and the clearing of land. Anthropogenic emissions currently account for the annual release of about 7 gigatons (7 billion tons) of carbon into the atmosphere. Anthropogenic emissions are equal to approximately 3 percent of the total emissions of CO2 by natural sources, and this amplified carbon load from human activities far exceeds the offsetting capacity of natural sinks (by perhaps as much as 2–3 gigatons per year).

deforestation
deforestation
Smoldering remains of a plot of deforested land in the Amazon Rainforest of Brazil. Annually, it is estimated that net global deforestation accounts for about two gigatons of carbon emissions to the atmosphere.
© Brasil2/iStock.com
CO2 has consequently accumulated in the atmosphere at an average rate of 1.4 parts per million (ppm) by volume per year between 1959 and 2006 and roughly 2.0 ppm per year between 2006 and 2018. Overall, this rate of accumulation has been linear (that is, uniform over time). However, certain current sinks, such as the oceans, could become sources in the future. This may lead to a situation in which the concentration of atmospheric CO2 builds at an exponential rate (that is, at a rate of increase that is also increasing over time).

The Keeling Curve, named after American climate scientist Charles David Keeling, tracks changes in the concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2) in Earth's atmosphere at a research station on Mauna Loa in Hawaii. Although these concentrations experience small seasonal fluctuations, the overall trend shows that CO2 is increasing in the atmosphere.
The Keeling Curve, named after American climate scientist Charles David Keeling, tracks changes in the concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2) in Earth's atmosphere at a research station on Mauna Loa in Hawaii. Although these concentrations experience small seasonal fluctuations, the overall trend shows that CO2 is increasing in the atmosphere.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
The natural background level of carbon dioxide varies on timescales of millions of years due to slow changes in outgassing through volcanic activity. For example, roughly 100 million years ago, during the Cretaceous Period, CO2 concentrations appear to have been several times higher than today (perhaps close to 2,000 ppm). Over the past 700,000 years, CO2 concentrations have varied over a far smaller range (between roughly 180 and 300 ppm) in association with the same Earth orbital effects linked to the coming and going of the ice ages of the Pleistocene epoch. By the early 21st century, CO2 levels reached 384 ppm, which is approximately 37 percent above the natural background level of roughly 280 ppm that existed at the beginning of the Industrial Revolution. Atmospheric CO2 levels continued to increase, and by 2018 they had reached 410 ppm. According to ice core measurements, such levels are believed to be the highest in at least 800,000 years and, according to other lines of evidence, may be the highest in at least 5,000,000 years.

Radiative forcing caused by carbon dioxide varies in an approximately logarithmic fashion with the concentration of that gas in the atmosphere. The logarithmic relationship occurs as the result of a saturation effect wherein it becomes increasingly difficult, as CO2 concentrations increase, for additional CO2 molecules to further influence the “infrared window” (a certain narrow band of wavelengths in the infrared region that is not absorbed by atmospheric gases). The logarithmic relationship predicts that the surface warming potential will rise by roughly the same amount for each doubling of CO2 concentration. At current rates of fossil-fuel use, a doubling of CO2 concentrations over preindustrial levels is expected to take place by the middle of the 21st century (when CO2 concentrations are projected to reach 560 ppm). A doubling of CO2 concentrations would represent an increase of roughly 4 watts per square metre of radiative forcing. Given typical estimates of “climate sensitivity” in the absence of any offsetting factors, this energy increase would lead to a warming of 2 to 5 °C (3.6 to 9 °F) over preindustrial times. The total radiative forcing by anthropogenic CO2 emissions since the beginning of the industrial age is approximately 1.66 watts per square metre.


----


Emissions from the Cement Industry
by Madeleine Rubenstein|May 9, 2012
Comments

cement machine A single industry accounts for around 5 percent of global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. It produces a material so ubiquitous it is nearly invisible: cement. It is the primary ingredient in concrete, which in turn forms the foundations and structures of the buildings we live and work in, and the roads and bridges we drive on. Concrete is the second most consumed substance on Earth after water. On average, each year, three tons of concrete are consumed by every person on the planet.

Concrete is used globally to build buildings, bridges, roads, runways, sidewalks, and dams. Cement is indispensable for construction activity, so it is tightly linked to the global economy. Its production is growing by 2.5 percent annually, and is expected to rise from 2.55 billion tons in 2006 to 3.7-4.4 billion tons by 2050.

Manufacture of Cement

Though “cement” and “concrete” are often used interchangeably, concrete is actually the final product made from cement. The primary component of cement is limestone. To produce cement, limestone and other clay-like materials are heated in a kiln at 1400°C and then ground to form a lumpy, solid substance called clinker; clinker is then combined with gypsum to form cement.

Cement manufacturing is highly energy- and emissions-intensive because of the extreme heat required to produce it.  Producing a ton of cement requires 4.7 million BTU of energy, equivalent to about 400 pounds of coal, and generates nearly a ton of CO2. Given its high emissions and critical importance to society, cement is an obvious place to look to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

Cement Emissions

The production of cement releases greenhouse gas emissions both directly and indirectly: the heating of limestone releases CO2 directly, while the burning of fossil fuels to heat the kiln indirectly results in CO2 emissions.

The direct emissions of cement occur through a chemical process called calcination. Calcination occurs when limestone, which is made of calcium carbonate, is heated, breaking down into calcium oxide and CO2. This process accounts for ~50 percent of all emissions from cement production.

Indirect emissions are produced by burning fossil fuels to heat the kiln. Kilns are usually heated by coal, natural gas, or oil, and the combustion of these fuels produces additional CO2 emissions, just as they would in producing electricity. This represents around 40 percent of cement emissions. Finally, the electricity used to power additional plant machinery, and the final transportation of cement, represents another source of indirect emissions and account for 5-10 percent of the industry’s emissions.

Opportunities to Mitigate

Indirect emissions from burning fossil fuels to heat the kiln can be reduced by switching to alternative fuels, including natural gas, biomass and waste-derived fuels such as tires, sewage sludge and municipal solid wastes. These less carbon-intensive fuels could reduce overall cement emissions by 18-24 percent from 2006 levels by 2050.

Alternatively, efficiency measures can reduce the demand for fuel by addressing the production process itself (such as switching from inefficient wet kilns to dry ones) or through technical and mechanical improvements (such as preventative maintenance to repair kiln leaks). While some estimate that energy efficiency improvements could achieve emission reductions of up to 40 percent, some industry analyses suggest that producers may have already exhausted this potential. Without additional financial incentives (such as subsidies or a tax on carbon), further breakthroughs could be difficult.

Reducing emissions from the calcination process means looking to a material other than limestone. Blended cement replaces some of the limestone-based clinker with other materials, primarily coal fly ash and blast furnace slag. It could reduce CO2 emissions by as much as 20 percent, but its widespread use is limited by other environmental regulations (these substitutes can contain toxic heavy metals); the limited availability of substitute material; and some building code restrictions (blended cement can take longer to set).

Finally, CO2 emissions can be captured after they are produced through carbon capture and storage (CCS). In addition to traditional CCS methods, which are already employed in some power plants, concrete producers can actually use their own product as a sink for CO2. Through the process of accelerated carbonation, CO2 penetrates concrete and reacts with calcium hydroxide in the presence of water to form calcium carbonate; the result is stable, long-term CO2 storage. As a mitigation technology, accelerated carbonation can be achieved by exposing freshly mixed concrete to flue gases with high CO2 concentrations.

Adapted from a factsheet published in the GNCS Factsheet Series, available here.